Updating FAQ (#365)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn-faq.md

_This FAQ focuses on technical questions for users interested in developing applications for Polkadot. If you have a more general question, you may wish to search for the answer on the main [Polkadot Network FAQ](https://polkadot.network/faq). If you have a question which is not answered, please feel free to ask on the Polkadot Watercooler [Riot channel](https://riot.im/app/#/room/#polkadot-watercooler:matrix.org)._

## Polkadot Launch

### What is the launch process of Polkadot Beta?

> The Polkadot network will launch first in as a Proof-of-Authority (PoA) chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Polkadot network will launch first as a Proof-of-Authority (PoA) chain.
```

During this time, governance will be controlled by the single Sudo (super-user)

> account, and functionality will be restricted to (among other things) disallow

Reviewer: "restricted to disallow" sounds strange (as it can be interpreted as restricting the disallowance, depending on how one reads double negatives).  How about... "...and functionality will be restricted.  Among other things, transfer of funds will not be allowed during this period."

the transfer of funds. 

> During this time, validators can start joining the network by signalling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During this time, validators can start joining the network and signaling
```

> their intention to participate in consensus. When a sufficient number of validator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their intention to participate in consensus. When a sufficient number of validators
```

are sourced from the community, the Sudo account will initiate the transition
of the chain security from PoA to Proof-of-Stake (PoS). After this happens,

> the first validator elections will begin and the chain  will be going forward 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the first validator elections will begin, and from that time onward, the chain will be 
```

secured by the economic stake that is bonded by validators and nominators.

After the chain has been secured by the decentralized community of validators,
the next step is to transition the governance of the chain into the hands of the

> token holders. The Sudo account will now initiate an upgrade that erases the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
token holders. The Sudo account will initiate an upgrade that erases the
```

Sudo logic from the chain entirely and replaces it with the stakeholder

> governance modules. From henceforward, the network is in the hands of the token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
governance modules. From this point, the network is entirely in the hands of the token
```

> holders and no longer under control of an authority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
holders and no longer under control of any centralized authority.
```

The final step to transition to full-functioning Polkadot is the enabling of

> transfer functionality. The community will need to propose a new upgrade and vote

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transfer functionality. The community will need to propose a runtime upgrade and vote
```

upon it in order to accomplish this. If the vote to enable transfers passes, then
it will be enacted shortly thereafter. When this takes place, Polkadot will

> be fully live and move out of it's Beta release label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be fully live and move out of its Beta release label.
```

### How many validators will be validating at Polkadot Beta launch?

Initially only a few authorized validators will be securing the network. However,
as [detailed in the answer above](#what-is-the-launch-process-of-polkadot-beta),

> the network will right away be available to vaidators that want to register

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the network will right away be available to validators that want to register
```

their intention to validate. The transition to Proof-of-Stake will largely
depend on when a sufficient number of validators have registered and are ready
to take over the security of the network. This number can be as low as 50 but

> probably closer to 100.

Reviewer: We may want to reference Kusama and also note that the idea if to increase the number of validators as time goes on.

## Validators

### How do I apply to be a validator?

There is no central authority that decides on validators, so there is not per se
an _application_ that you can fill out. Registering as a validator is

> permissionless, in order to become one you must only set up a validator node and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
permissionless; in order to become one you must only set up a validator node and
```

mark your intention to validate on chain. For detailed instruction on how to do
this you can consult the [wiki guide](maintain-guides-how-to-validate-kusama.md)
on validating for Kusama.

However, once you've set up a validator and have registered your intention it
does not mean that you will be included in the _active set_ right
away. The validators are elected to the active set based on the results of an

> election algorithm known as [Phragmen's method](learn-phragmen). Phragmen's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
election algorithm known as [Phragmen's method](learn-phragmen). Phragmen's method
```

> tries to accomplish two things, 1) select `n` members from a larger set based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tries to accomplish two goals: 1) select `n` members from a larger set based
```

on stake-weighted votes and 2) equalize the stake backing each validator as 
much as possible.

You will likely want to campaign your validator to the community in order to
get more backing. You are looking for _nominators_ that will put up their tokens

> to increase the stake for your validator. Besides this, for validators who

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to increase the stake for your validator. For validators who
```

cannot acquire the minimum stake from the community, Parity and Web3 Foundation

> run a joint program called [Thousand Validators][thousand validators] that will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also run a joint program called [Thousand Validators][thousand validators] that will
```

> run a joint program called [Thousand Validators][thousand validators] that will

Reviewer: Is this the right link? `[thousand validators]`

It does not look properly formatted.

Author: It's a [reference-style link](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet#links). Usually I find these easier for longer documents since we can collect all the external links at the bottom of the document.

nominate validators if they apply and fit the requirements.

### How are validators rewarded?

Validators are rewarded from the inflation of the Relay Chain, transaction fees,

> and tips. However they only take a percentage of the former two. More details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and tips. However, they only take a percentage of the former two. More details
```

can be read on the page for [validator payouts](maintain-guides-validator-payout).

### What is the minimum stake necessary to be elected as an active validator?

The minimum stake that is necessary to be elected as an active validator is
dynamic and can change over time. It depends not only on how much stake is being
put behind each validator, but also the size of the active set and how many
validators are waiting in the pool.

There are a few ways to estimate the minimum stake.

> One way, can be to navigate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One way can be to navigate
```

to the [Polkadot Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps) and click on the Staking
tab. Scroll all the way down to the bottom and look at the stake backing the
validator at the end of the list. That's roughly the minimum stake required
to enter the active set at that era.

You can also use some tools some to perform estimations.

- [Offline Phragmen](https://github.com/kianenigma/offline-phragmen) can provide
exact results of running an election on the current set of validators using the 
same Rust code that is ran in Polkadot. 

- [Validator stats script](https://github.com/ansonla3/kusama-validator-stats) can

> give you the estimation that is based on the currently elected set, as well as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
give you an estimate that is based on the currently elected set, as well as
```

some statistics about Kusama validators.

### Why will Polkadot have only 1000 validators while other projects have hundreds of thousands?

Polkadot's goal to have 1000 validators is set to be something that is practically
achievable in the short term with high confidence of good performance in a live
environment. Furthermore, validators in Polkadot are not the only stakers, and
if we consider the number of stakers that can be possible on Polkadot the number
can scale up to hundreds of thousands. Since validators are performing critical
consensus work to maintain the security of the chain including all of its shards,
a more modest number of validators is estimated to start. Upon later improvements,

> such as implementing signature aggregation for finalization messages the number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as implementing signature aggregation for finalization messages, the number
```

of validators could reasonably scale up. However, increasing validators above
one thousand remains a goal for later iterations of Polkadot.

It is also worth mentioning that one thousand validators is more than
the number of validators of similar PoS chains with comparable levels of economic
security as Polkadot. The closest contenders are operating with around 150

> validators, while Kusama is running with 180 securely as of April 2020.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
validators, while Kusama is running with 225 securely as of April 2020.
```

Might as well bump it already.

Additionally, other projects sometimes have a different definition of _validator_
that approximates more closely to remote signing keys without the full
operation of a validating node. On Polkadot, each validator is running their own
validating node and performing full verification of the Relay Chain, voting on
finality, producing blocks in their decided slots, and verifying parachain state
transitions. Other projects may consider validators and "validating nodes" as
separate entities.

## Relay Chain

### What is the expected block time on the Relay Chain?

The Kusama network, an early and unaudited release of the Polkadot code is
currently operating at a rate of one block every six seconds. 

> It is expected that Polkadot will also target its block production for producing

Reviewer 2: Change to active?

We expect Polkadot to also target...

a block every six seconds. However, it is still subject to change. It may go
as low as two to three seconds after optimizations, or it may potentially
increase in order to handle the capacity of the parachain networking in a live
environment.

### Does Polkadot have smart contracts?

No - and yes. The Polkadot Relay Chain does not implement smart contracts
natively. The reason for not having smart contracts on the Relay Chain is 

> party of the design philosophy for Polkadot that dictates it should be the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
party of the design philosophy for Polkadot that dictates that the Relay Chain should be the 
```

The "it" was a little confusing - it could have referred to "Polkadot" itself since that was the last noun specified beforehand.

minimal logic required to accomplish its job.

However, Polkadot will be a platform for other chains that _do_ implement
smart contracts. It's possible for parachains to enable smart contract functionality
and then benefit from the security and interoperability features of Polkadot. 

> Additionally, already existing smart contract chains can connect to Polkadot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, existing smart contract chains can connect to Polkadot
```

as a parachain, or via a bridge.

While the Polkadot Relay Chain does not implement smart contracts directly,
undoubtedly there will be parachains that do. So it's better to say that the 
Polkadot _ecosystem_ has smart contracts versus "Polkadot has smart contracts."

### How will the Polkadot Relay Chain connect to external chains in the ecosystem?

One of the cornerstone interoperability technologies being research and developed
for deployment on Polkadot is cross-chain bridges. Bridges come in a variety
of flavors with varying levels of trust associated with them. Polkadot is predominantly
researching the trust-minimized flavor that imposes economic costs on the operators
of the bridge, and therefore makes it economically secure. Bridge efforts are being

> work on in concert with other projects in the ecosystem. Eventually, there

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
worked on in concert with other projects in the ecosystem. Eventually, there
```

will be bridges between Polkadot and most of the other major chains. 

## DOTs

### What is the inflation rate of the DOT?

> The inflation rate is 10% per year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The inflation rate is approximately 10% per year, although this can vary based on how much is staked.
```

Reviewer 2: Mmm it shouldn't. Inflation will be a fixed 10% but the ratio of reward to validators vs treasury will vary depending on how much is staked.

A portion of the inflation is rewarded to validators for performing their duties,
while another portion may go directly to the treasury. The exact percentage that
goes into both varies and is based on the amount of DOTs that are staked.
Please see the article on [inflation](learn-staking#inflation) for more information.

### Can I buy or transfer DOT tokens?

Testnet DOT tokens are freely available from a variety of sources. See
the [DOT page](learn-DOT) for details.

The Web3 Foundation will distribute up to 20% of mainnet DOTs prior to network
launch (see [Light Paper](https://polkadot.network/Polkadot-lightpaper.pdf) or
the [Polkadot Network FAQ](https://polkadot.network/faq/)).  Subscribe to the
Polkadot newsletter on [polkadot.network](https://polkadot.network/) for further
updates.

> DOT token are not transferrable until the launch of Polkadot Beta is complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DOT tokens are not transferable until the launch of Polkadot Beta is complete.
```

> Any transfers before that time of DOTs are illegitimate and unauthorized. DOTs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any transfers of DOTs before that time are illegitimate and unauthorized. DOTs
```

> are currenly represented on Ethereum as the DOT Indicator Token, these cannot be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are currengly represented on Ethereum as the DOT Indicator Token, these cannot be
```

Reviewer: Should we include a link to the Dot Indicator token contract?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are currently represented on Ethereum as the DOT Indicator Token, these cannot be
```

Author: @laboon good idea

moved from the current allocation address. Individuals with an allocation of DOTs

> can always keep a copy of their private key, therefore it is extreme risk for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can always keep a copy of their private key, therefore it is extremely risky for
```

Reviewer: We may want to add something to say that W3F does not support anything like this?

Reviewer 2: We should. I was contacted by someone on Twitter complaining about DOTs having crashed from 300 USD to 80 USD. When pressed, he showed me [this](https://coinflex.com/assets/CoinFLEX-Polkadot-Futures-Contract-Specification.pdf) and I had to explain that we had nothing to do with this.

individuals to participate in trading of DOTs before Polkadot launch.

## Governance

### What prevents Polkadot governance from failing?

> Polkadot's governance has already been shown to work, examples of which can by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polkadot's governance has already been shown to work. Examples can be
```

found in the runtime upgrades that have successfully taken place through on the 
testnets as well as in a real economic environment on [Kusama](kusama-index).

It is fair to say that the field of on-chain blockchain governance is still new,
and no one can claim to know exactly what is the optimal version of on-chain
governance yet. However, Polkadot takes a brave step forward in pioneering
thought-through mechanisms for evolving a blockchain.

Blockchains need a method to adapt and evolve. Therefore, an on-chain governance
system was necessary for the long-term success of Polkadot. Ultimately, it is

> the token holders that are resonsible for preventing Polkadot's governance from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the token holders that are responsible for preventing Polkadot's governance from
```

failing by using their economic value and conviction to sway the progression of
the protocol.

### What prevents Polkadot governance from becoming plutocratic?

A savvy reader might have noticed that the answer to the previous question
endowed the token holder with the ultimate responsibility to ensure that
Polkadot's governance does not fail. By following the train of this assertion,
one might assume that Polkadot's governance is susceptible to becoming ruled
by a few large token holders (called _whales_ in trading parlance) and therefore
become a mere plutocracy (rule of the rich).

> There are a couple further mechanisms that are built-in to the governance system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several other mechanisms that are built-in to the governance system
```

to resist this plutocratic tendency. One of these mechanisms is called conviction
voting, and imbues greater voting power to token holders who are willing to lock
their tokens on the protocol for longer lengths of time. Longer lock-ups display _conviction_
in a vote. Conviction voting could allow a highly determined minority to overrule
the vote of an apathetic majority in certain situations. Another mechanism is

> known as Adaptive Quorum Biasing, and this makes it so that proposals have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
known as Adaptive Quorum Biasing.  This makes proposals have a
```

varying threshold for approval or rejection based on what part of the governance

> protocol that the proposal originated in. For details on the subtleties of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
protocol the proposal originated in. For details on the subtleties of
```

Polkadot's governance system, please see the [governance page](learn-governance).

## Parachains

### How do parachain economics work?

Parachains have the flexibility to implement their own monetary system or
incentive structure for collators. However, this is not strictly necessary.
Since the collator's job is to continue to give recent state transitions to

> the validators on the relay chain whom validate each transition, the security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the validators on the relay chain who validate each transition, the security
```

of the parachain and the Polkadot network is completely separate from parachain
economics. Parachains need collators to continue to progress, so it wouldn't be

> unreasonable to see them incentivize collator nodes in some way but it is completely

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unreasonable to see them incentivize collator nodes in some way but the specific mechanism is completely
```

up to parachain implementers.

### Are parachains ephemeral? What happens when a parachain loses the next auction?

Parachains are not ephemeral. As long as someone is keeping the data for a
parachain, the parachain can move between being a parachain, a parathread, or
a separate sovereign chain at different points of its lifetime. Especially
with parathreads, parachains can be decommissioned to only produce blocks when
their usage and throughput makes it necessary.

When a parachain loses an auction for renewal, that parachain has a few options.
In most cases, becoming a parathread instead would be a suitable choice. Parathreads
are still secured by the Relay Chain, but don't need to hold a parachain slot
and can produce a block when its economically feasible for them. For more on
parachains please see the [parachains page](learn-parachains) and for more on

> parathreads see [here](learn-parathreads).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
parathreads see [the parathreads page](learn-parathreads).
```

Accessibility

## Networking

### What is libp2p?

[Libp2p][libp2p] is a modular and extensible networking stack that is used by
IPFS, Substrate, and many other projects. It is a collection of peer-to-peer

> protocols for finding peers and connecting to them. It's modules have logic for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protocols for finding peers and connecting to them. Its modules have logic for
```

content routing, peer routing, peer discovery, different transports, and NAT
traversals. It is intended to be used by applications for building large scale
peer-to-peer networks by only selecting the parts of the protocol suite that are
needed.

The Rust implementation of the specification was built and primarily maintained
by a team of contributors at Parity Technologies. The Go and JavaScript versions

> are maintained by Protocol Labs as well as community contributors. It is an open

Reviewer 2: There is now also a nim-native version used by Nimbus, if that warrants a mention.

source project that is actively developed and expanded on various code repositories
hosted on [GitHub][libp2p github].

### Does Polkadot use libp2p?

Yes, since Polkadot is built with Substrate. Substrate uses a networking protocol
that is based on libp2p (specifically the Rust libp2p library). However, Substrate
uses a mix of standard libp2p protocols and protocols that are homegrown and not

> official libp2p standards. Of the standards protocols, these which are shared

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
official libp2p standards. Of the standards protocols, those which are shared
```

with other implementations of libp2p such as IPFS, are connection-checking (ping),
asking for information on a peer (identity), and Kademlia random walks (kad).

Of the protocols that are custom to Substrate, there are the legacy Substrate
stream, a request-response for getting information on blocks (sync), a light
client protocol, a notification protocol for transactions, and block announcement.
For detailed information on how Substrate uses libp2p and the standard and custom

> protocols, please see the [networking documentation][substrate network]. 

Reviewer: Is that "substrate network" link valid?

Reviewer: Ahh just realized these are footnotes.  I think it might make sense to link directly instead of indirectly through footnotes but I could be convinced otherwise.

Author: They look the same when presented in HTML (inline links), just some markdown syntactic sugar.

### How does libp2p differ from IPFS?

The [Interplanetary Filesystem][ipfs] (IPFS) is a peer-to-peer hypermedia protocol
used primarily for storage of files. It allows one to upload a file onto the
network and share it with its content addressable URI. IPFS, like Substrate,
is an application of libp2p and exists higher on the technology stack. Although
both IPFS and Substrate use libp2p, it cannot be said that Substrate "uses" IPFS
since besides sharing the underlying library for networking there is no native
integration between the two applications.

## Kusama

### What is the minimum amount of KSM I can have in my account?

> It is recommended to always ensure that you keep at least 0.1 KSM in your account in order to avoid the reaping threshold of 0.01 KSM.  If you have less than 0.01 KSM in your account, that account will be "reaped" - it will be removed and no longer occupy space on the chain. In other words, no accounts are allowed on-chain with an account balance of less than 0.01 KSM.   This is a dust prevention measure, in order to ensure that the chain is not full of accounts with minuscule amounts of KSM taking up space. Since the blockchain is copied to every person running a full node, any savings of space provides dramatic benefits in terms of scalability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend users always keep at least 0.1 KSM in their account in order to avoid the reaping threshold of 0.01 KSM.  If you have less than 0.01 KSM in your account, that account will be "reaped" - it will be removed and no longer occupy space on the chain. In other words, no accounts are allowed on-chain with an account balance of less than 0.01 KSM.   This is a dust prevention measure, in order to ensure that the chain is not full of accounts with minuscule amounts of KSM taking up space. Since the blockchain is copied to every person running a full node, any savings of space provide dramatic benefits in terms of scalability.
```

### What are the transfer fees for Kusama?

It is important to note that the cost of transferring KSM is dynamic.
Currently, the minimum cost of transferring KSM is 0.01 KSM (the base fee), although
this can be changed via governance. However, actual transaction fees will vary
based on a variety of factors. Specifically, fee calculation follows the following
formula:

```
base_fee + (tx_length * length_fee) + WeightToFee(weight)
```

> Please see the [fee calculation][fee calculation] page in the Substrate documentation

Reviewer: Is the link formatting correct?
